% This is a LaTeX thesis template for Monash University.
% to be used with Rmarkdown
% This template was produced by Rob Hyndman
% Version: 6 September 2016

\documentclass{monashthesis}

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% Add any LaTeX packages and other preamble here if required
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\author{Nicholas S Spyrison}
\title{Dynamic visualization of high-dimensional data via low-dimension
projections across 2D and 3D display devices}
\degrees{B.Sc. Statistics, Iowa State University}
\def\degreetitle{Doctor of Philosophy}
% Add subject and keywords below
\hypersetup{
     %pdfsubject={The Subject},
     %pdfkeywords={Some Keywords},
     pdfauthor={Nicholas S Spyrison},
     pdftitle={Dynamic visualization of high-dimensional data via low-dimension
projections across 2D and 3D display devices},
     pdfproducer={Bookdown with LaTeX}
}


\bibliography{thesisrefs}

\begin{document}

\pagenumbering{roman}

\titlepage

{\setstretch{1.2}\sf\tighttoc\doublespacing}

\chapter*{Abstract}\label{abstract}
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{Abstract}

Visualizing data space is crucial to exploratory and general data
analysis yet doing so quickly becomes difficult as the dimensionality of
the data increases. Traditionally, static, low-dimensional linear
embeddings are used to identify clustering, outliers, and structure.
Observing one such embedding often misses a significant amount of
variation, and hence, information held within the data. Tours are a
class of dynamic linear projections that animates many linear
projections as the orientation in data space changes. This maintains
transparency to the original variables, while preserving information in
the data. User-controlled steering (UCS) of the original dimensionality
offers fine control of the local structure of projections.

Excitement and hype about virtual reality preceded hardware's progress
in the 1980's and 90's for a false start with data visualization.
Despite this and more recently, studies have regularly shown increased
accuracy of perception of visuals displayed in 3D over 2D, including in
projected subspaces.

Multivariate data is ubiquitous and viewing it in data-space is a
crucial aspect of data analysis and consumption. This research involves
scaling data visualization as data dimensionality increases, improving
the perception of dynamic linear projections via application in VR, and
implements novel dynamic projections in 3D space, and explores the
benefits of doing so.

\clearpage\pagenumbering{arabic}\setcounter{page}{0}

\chapter{Introduction}\label{ch:introduction}

\section{Exploratory data analysis}\label{exploratory-data-analysis}

The term exploratory data analysis was coined in
\textcite{tukey_exploratory_1977}. Tukey purposefully leaves the term to
broadly encompass the phase of exploring, understanding the structure of
the data and validating assumptions made by prospective methodology.
Data is everywhere and understanding the shape and distribution of the
data is an early and fundamental task. Visualization is crucial to a
clear understanding of the data. Things can go awry when data is
summarized via numeric statistics alone
\autocites{anscombe_graphs_1973}{matejka_same_2017}. In these studies,
bivariate data have the same summary statistics, while showing obvious
red flags that could go completely unheeded if preliminary graphing is
foregone. This requirement for visuals also necessitates
\emph{human-in-the-loop} analysis.




\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/matejka17fig} 

}

\caption{12 data sets created from the datasaurus, each
with the same summary statistics, yet visual peculiarity.}\label{fig:matejka17fig}
\end{figure}

It is clear that data-space visualization is needed but becomes complex
as data dimensionality increases. Embedding (or projecting)
\(p-\)dimensional data on to a lower, \(d\)-dimensional subspace is a
common dimension reduction approach to visualize multivariate data
spaces. Traditionally single static projection is used to summarize a
space, which necessarily shows a subset of the variation of the data.
\textcite{asimov_grand_1985} suggested the use of viewing projections
dynamically across a changing projection basis allows for more variation
to be contained and viewed temporally. This dynamic view of many
changing projections is known as \emph{tours}. While, there are
different methods of generating tour paths, human-in-the-loop
user-controlled steering (UCS) offers the finest control for navigating
local structure and is particularly useful in exploration after an
interesting feature has been identified.

Hardware improvement has made VR more affordable and available to wider
audiences, at ever increasing resolutions of display. The literature
points to improved perception when viewing multivariate data in 3D VR as
compared with traditional 2D monitors. Yet tours are often viewed on 2D
monitors while the selected geometric display dictates the
dimensionality of graphic, \(d=\{1, 2, p\}\). With the exception
\textcite{nelson_xgobi_1998}, where \(d=2\) tours were viewed in 3D
head-tracked VR. Bringing dynamic projections and UCS into VR should
improve perception of \(d=2\) embeddings, allow for more accurate and
intuitive perception of 3D surfaces, and enable dynamic projections
\(d=3\) spaces.

\section{Research objectives}\label{research-objectives}

Data and models are typically high-dimensional, with many variables or
parameters. Developing new methods to visualize high dimensions have
been a pursuit of statisticians, computer scientists and visualization
researchers for decades. As technology evolves examining, extending, and
assessing current techniques, in new environments, for new data
challenges, is an important endeavor. The primary goal of this PhD
research can then be summarized as:

\textbf{Research objectives (RO):}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{How can UCS be implemented in 1- and 2D projections?}
  (Completed work, chapter \ref{ch:completed_work}.) Following the
  theory laid out in \textcite{cook_manual_1997} this work enables
  manual tours for fine control in exploring the local area of
  interesting features. Previous implementations are no longer
  compiling. 
\item
  \textbf{Does 2D UCS provide benefits over alternatives?} (Future work,
  chapter \ref{ch:future_work}.) This objective compares the
  effectiveness of dynamic linear projection and UCS against commonly
  used alternatives of static linear and static non-linear projections. 
\item
  \textbf{How can UCS be extended to 3D?} (Future work, chapter
  \ref{ch:future_work}.) Bringing dynamic projections into 3D not only
  allows for more accurate and precise interpretation of \(d=2\)
  projections, but also for the projection of \(d=3\) scatterplots and
  surfaces. 
\item
  \textbf{Does UCS in 3D displays provide perception benefits over 2D
  displays?} (Future work, chapter \ref{ch:future_work}.) This objective
  tests the efficacy of dynamic projections as compared across various
  display devices. 
\end{enumerate}

\section{Methodology}\label{methodology}

RO \#1 is completed \textbf{applied research} following work in
\textcite{cook_manual_1997} to allow for UCS. This outcome of this is an
\emph{R} package, \texttt{spinifex}, which will be submitted to to CRAN
and for hosting and distribution. This forms the foundation for future
work in the remaining objectives.

The second objective is a \textbf{case study} comparison between dynamic
linear projections and alternatives (static linear and static non-linear
projections such as Principal Component Analysis, Multi-Dimensional
Scaling, and t-distributed neighbor embeddings, described in more detail
in chapter \ref{ch:future_work}). Measures comparing between the
techniques will include: variation explained, transparency to the
original variable space, clustering, and outlier identification.

RO \#3 involves \textbf{experimental design} applying contribution from
RO \#1 with the immersive analytics toolkit (IATK) in
\textcite{cordeil_immersive_2019}, an extensible toolkit for visualizing
data in VR. First the work from RO \# 1 will be extend into \(d=3\)
projections an surface projections. This will be called from the IATK
and used for a standardized interface across display devices.

The response to RO \#4 is a \emph{randomized full factorial design}
\textbf{empirical study} to explore the efficacy of bringing UCS into 3D
as compared across various display devices. In this design every
participant will complete every task on every display device.
Quantitative measurements include participant speed and accuracy of
tasks, biometric readings, and subjective Likert survey of participants.
A lineup-type model as outlined in \textcite{hofmann_graphical_2012} may
also be employed for assessing quality of display types.

In this report, the related literature is discussed in chapter
\ref{ch:lit_review}. A brief overview of the research is given in
chapter \ref{ch:projectoverview}, followed by the completed work and
future work in chapters \ref{ch:completed_work} and \ref{ch:future_work}
respectively. A prospective timeline is listed in chapter
\ref{ch:timeline}. Notation for dynamic touring and VR data
visualization can be found in appendix \ref{ch:glossary}, and an excerpt
of a paper to be submitted to the R Journal can be found in appendix
\ref{ch:spinifex_paper}.

\section{Workflow and reproduction}\label{workflow-and-reproduction}

Figure \ref{dataanalysisworkflow} depicts general data analysis workflow
\autocite{wickham_r_2016}. Where data first must be imported into a
tool, the structure of the data must be tidied and ordered neatly into
the correct use format. After the data enters a repeating cycle, where
values maybe transformed, visualized, and modeled with communication
going to the appropriate recipients.





\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{./figures/data_analysis_workflow} 

}

\caption{Data analysis workflow
\autocite{wickham_r_2016}. This research aids visualization in
exploratory data analysis and in the workflow.}\label{fig:dataanalysisworkflow}
\end{figure}

The programing language, \emph{R}, is used in the work described below
to import, tidy, and transform data. It can be use directly to visualize
2D tour (RO \#1 \& 2) or be consumed into the game engine \emph{Unity}
to visualize 3D tours (RO \#3 \& 4). Doing analysis and writeup in such
programmatic ways allow work to be done reproducibly. All work completed
and discussed is done with reproduction principles in mind, where data,
analysis, and code are stored in the same directory in order to make the
work as transparent and reproducible as possible. Transparency and
reproduction of work is a key feature to a mature analysis workflow as
they validate and defend the claims and methodology held within a work.
Directories of completed and planned work are hosted publicly on GitHub,
including this report. Accessing the source files for this report is
discussed in section \ref{sec:source}.

\chapter{Literature review}\label{ch:lit_review}

In the following chapter we discuss the academic research in two primary
areas: that of dynamic linear projection (collectively known as tours)
followed by multivariate data visualization in stereoscopic 3D. After
each section we highlight the research gaps and show how they relate to
the research objectives.

\section{Dynamic linear projections of multivariate data
(tours)}\label{sec:tour}

\subsection{Overview}\label{overview}

The introduction established that visualizing data-space is an important
aspect of exploratory data analysis and data analysis in general. Yet,
there is an inherent difficulty as the dimensionality of data increases.
In univariate data sets histograms, or smoothed density curves are
employed to visualize data. In bivariate data \(x-y\) scatterplots and
contour plots (2D density) can be employed. In three dimensions the two
most common techniques are 3D
scatterplot\footnote{Graphs depicting 3 dimensions are typically printed on paper, or rendered on a 2D monitor, they are intrinsically 2D images of monocular 3D spaces, sometimes referred to as 2.5D data visualization, more on this in section \ref{sec:3d-terminology}.}
or 2D scatterplot with the 3rd variable as an aesthetic (such as color,
size, or height). Such variable mappings can afford another dimension or
2, but this is not a sustainable solution.

Visualization of multivariate data for modest \(p\) numeric dimension,
even 6 or 8, quickly becomes complex in. It's far too common that
visualizing in data-space is dropped altogether in favor of modeling
parameter-space, model-space, or worse: long tables of statistics
without visuals \autocite{wickham_visualizing_2015}. A solution that
better scales with the dimensionality of data is needed; this is where
dimensionality reduction comes in. This work will focus on a group of
dynamic linear projection techniques collectively known as \emph{tours}.
Broader review of dimensionality reduction techniques is discussed in
\textcite{grinstein_high-dimensional_2002}, and
\textcite{heer_tour_2010}. Tours are used for a couple of salient
features: use of linear projections maintaining transparency back to the
original variable space (which non-linear projections lose) and keeps
all components and their information in tack (which static linear
projections lose). Employing the breadth of tours extends the
dimensionality visualization, and with it, the intrinsic understanding
of structure and distribution of data that is more succinct or beyond
the reach of summary statistics alone.

Tours perform linear dimensionality reduction, orthogonally projecting
\(p\)-space down to \(d(\leq p)\) dimensions. Many such projections are
interpolated, each making small rotations in \(p\)-space. These frames
are then viewed in order as an animation of the lower dimensional
embedding changing as the original variable space is manipulated. Shadow
puppets offer a useful analogy to aid in conceptualizing touring.
Imagine a fixed light source facing a wall. When an object is introduced
it projects a 2D shadow onto the wall. This is a physical representation
of a simple projection, that from \(p=3\) down to \(d=2\). If the object
rotates then the shadow correspondingly changes. Observers watching only
the shadow are functionally watching a \(d=2\) tour as the 3D object is
manipulated. Some orientations explain more information about the shape
of the object than others but watching an animation of the shadow
changing gives a more robust understanding than looking at any one
frame. More complex structures generally require more time to comprehend
the nature of the geometry. These features hold true in touring as well.

\subsection{Example illustrations}\label{example-illustrations}

A list of tour notation is given in the appendix section
\ref{sec:tour_notation}.

This sections a toy data set of 74 observations of flea beetles across 6
numeric variables corresponding to physical measurements,
\(\textbf{X}_{[74,~6]} \in \mathbb{R}^{6}\). Each observation belongs to
one of 3 species as shown in the color and shape of the data points.
Figure \ref{fig:flea-refframe} shows one frame of a tour (left) and the
corresponding reference frame (right) showing the linear combination of
the variables onto the projection-space, a visual representation of the
basis.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics{thesis_files/figure-latex/flea-refframe-1} 

}

\caption{(left) one frame of a x-y scatterplot projection, the results of holes tour with a corresponding reference frame indicating the direction and magnitude the variables contribute to the 2D projection.}\label{fig:flea-refframe}
\end{figure}

Tours view many such frames in sequence, by identifying some target
frames and then interpolating between them as shown schematically in
figure \ref{fig:buja05fig}, captured from figure 1 of
\textcite{buja_computational_2005}. For illustration figure
\ref{fig:flea-static} lays out frames of a tour, A html version of a
user-controlled steering can be found at
\url{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/flea_manualtour_mvar5/}. The
sections below will outline path generation and enumerate display geoms.






\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/buja05fig} 

}

\caption{Screen capture of figure 1 from
\textcite{buja_computational_2005}. A schematic representation of
randomly generated planes (from a grand tour) and intermediate
interpolation planes.}\label{fig:buja05fig}
\end{figure}





\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6in,height=7.2in]{thesis_files/figure-latex/flea-static-1} 

}

\caption{Illustration of a radial manual tour (RO \#1), a
dynamic version can be viewed at
\url{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/flea_manualtour_mvar5/}.}\label{fig:flea-static}
\end{figure}

\subsection{History}\label{history}

Touring was first introduced by \textcite{asimov_grand_1985} with his
purposed \emph{grand tour} at the Stanford Linear Accelerator, Stanford
University. In which, Asimov suggested three types of grand tours:
torus, at-random, and random-walk. The original application of touring
was on high energy physics on the PRIM-9 system.

Before choosing projection paths randomly, an exhaustive search of
\(p-\)space of was suggested by \textcite{mcdonald_interactive_1982},
also at the Stanford Linear Accelerator. This was later coined as
\emph{little tour}.

\textcite{friedman_projection_1974} and later
\textcite{huber_projection_1985} purposed projection pursuit (also
referred to as PP). Projection pursuit involves identifying
``interesting'' projection, remove a single component of the data, and
then iterates in this newly embedded subspace. Within each subspace the
projection seeks for a local extremum via hill climbing algorithm on an
objective function. This formed the basis for \emph{guided tours}
suggested by \textcite{hurley_analyzing_1990}.

The grand and little tour have no input from the user aside from the
starting basis. Guided tours allow for an index to be selected, but the
bulk of touring development since has largely been around dynamic
display, user interaction, geometric representation, and application.
The extent to which will be expounded on in the following sections.

\subsection{Path generation}\label{path-generation}

A fundamental aspect of touring is the path of rotation. Of which there
are four primary distinctions \autocite{buja_computational_2005}: random
choice, data driven, precomputed choice, and manual control.

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Random choice, \emph{grand tour}, constrained random walks
  \(p\)-space. Paths are constrained for changes in direction small
  enough to maintain continuity and aid in user comprehension

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    torus-surface \autocite{asimov_grand_1985}
  \item
    at-random \autocite{asimov_grand_1985}
  \item
    random-walk \autocite{asimov_grand_1985}
  \item
    \emph{local tour} \autocite{wickham_tourr_2011}, a sort of grand
    tour on a leash, such that it goes to a nearby random projection
    before returning to the original position and iterating to a new
    nearby projection.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  data driven, \emph{guided tour}, optimizing some objective
  function/index within the projection-space, called projection pursuit
  (PP) \autocite{hurley_analyzing_1990}, including the following
  indexes:

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    holes \autocite{cook_projection_1993} - moves points away from the
    center.
  \item
    cmass \autocite{cook_projection_1993} - moves points toward the
    center.
  \item
    lda \autocite{lee_projection_2005} - linear discriminant analysis,
    seeks a projection where 2 or more classes are most separated.
  \item
    pda \autocite{lee_projection_2010} - penalized discriminant analysis
    for use in highly correlated variables when classification is
    needed.
  \item
    convex \autocite{laa_using_2019} - the ratio of area of convex and
    alpha hulls.
  \item
    skinny \autocite{laa_using_2019} - the ratio of of the perimeter
    distance to the area of the alpha hull.
  \item
    stringy \autocite{laa_using_2019} - based on the minimum spanning
    tree (MST), the diameter of the MST over the length of the MST.
  \item
    dcor2D \autocites{grimm_mbgraphic:_2017}{laa_using_2019} - distance
    correlation that finds linear and non-linear dependencies between
    variables.
  \item
    splines2D \autocites{grimm_mbgraphic:_2017}{laa_using_2019} -
    measure of non-linear dependence by fitting spline models.
  \item
    other user-defined objective function can be implemented with the
    \emph{tourr} package \textcite{wickham_tourr_2011}.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  Precomputed choice, \emph{planned tour}, in which the path has already
  been generated or defined.

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    \emph{little tour} \autocite{mcdonald_interactive_1982}, where every
    permutation of variables is stepped through in order, analogous to a
    brute-force or exhaustive search.
  \item
    a saved path of any other tour, typically an array of basis targets
    to interpolate between.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  Manual control, \emph{manual tour}, a constrained rotation on selected
  manipulation variable and magnitude \autocite{cook_manual_1997}.
  Typically used to explore the local area after identifying an
  interesting feature, perhaps via guided tour.
\item
  \emph{dependence tour}, combination of \(n\) independent 1D tours. A
  vector describes the axis each variable will be displayed on.
  \emph{ie} \(c(1, 1, 2, 2)\) is a 4- to 2D tour with the first 2
  variables on the first axis, and the remaining on the second.

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    \emph{correlation tour} \autocite{buja_data_1987}, a special case of
    the dependence tour, analogous to canonical correlation analysis.
  \end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Path evaluation}\label{path-evaluation}

Consider \(d=2\), then each projection is called a 2-frame (each
spanning a 2-plane). Mathematically, a Grassmannian is the set of all
possible unoriented 2-frames in \(p\)-space, \(\textbf{Gr}(2,~p)\).
\textcite{asimov_grand_1985} pointed out that the unique 2-frames of the
grand tour approaches \(\textbf{Gr}(2,~p)\) as time goes to infinity.
The \emph{density} of a tour is defined as the fraction of the
Grassmannian explored. Ideally an exploring tour will be dense, but the
time taken to become dense vastly increases as variable space increase
dimensionality. \emph{Rapidity} is then defined as how quickly a tour
encompasses the Grassmannian. Due to the random selection of a grand
tour it will end up visiting homomorphisms of previous 2-frames, leading
sub-optimal rapidity.

The little tour introduced in \textcite{mcdonald_interactive_1982}, on
the other hand is necessarily both dense and rapid, performing
essentially an exhaustive search on the Grassmannian. However, this path
uninteresting and with long periods of similar projections strung
together. The Grassmannian is necessarily large and increases with the
square of \(p\). Viewing of the whole Grassmannian is time consuming,
and interesting projections are sparse, there was a clear space for
computers to narrow the search space.

Guided tours \autocite{hurley_analyzing_1990} optimize an objective
function generating path will be relatively small subset of the
Grassmannian. As such, density and rapidity are poor measures, however
interesting projections are quickly identified. Recently,
\textcite{laa_using_2019}, compared projection pursuit indices with the
metrics: \emph{smoothness, squintability, flexibility, rotation
invariance} and \emph{speed}.

\subsection{Geometric display by
dimensionality}\label{geometric-display-by-dimensionality}

Up to this point this document has discussed 2D scatterplots, which
offer a logical display for viewing embeddings of high-dimensional point
clouds. However, other geometrics offer perfectly valid projections as
well.

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  1D geometrics (geoms)

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    1D densities: such as histogram, average shifted histograms
    \autocite{scott_averaged_1985}, and kernel density
    \autocite{scott_incorporating_1995}.
  \item
    image (pixel): \autocite{wegman_pixel_2001}.
  \item
    time series: where multivariate values are independently lagged to
    view peak and trough alignment. Currently no package implementation,
    but use case is discussed in \autocite{cook_manual_1997}.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  2D geoms

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    2D density (available on GitHub at
    \url{https://github.com/nspyrison/tourr})
  \item
    \(x-y\) scatterplot
  \end{itemize}
\item
  3D geoms - these geoms do not perform projections in 3 dimensions, but
  rather are \(d=2\) projections that utilize the manipulation dimension
  to give depth perception cues.

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    Anaglyphs, sometimes called stereo, where (typically) red images are
    positioned for the left channel and cyan for the right, when viewed
    with corresponding filter glasses give the depth perception of the
    image.
  \item
    Depth, which gives depth cues via aesthetic mappings, most commonly
    size and/or color of data points.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  \(d\)-dimensional geoms

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    Andrews curves \autocite{andrews_plots_1972}, smoothed variant of
    parallel coordinate plots, discussed below.
  \item
    Chernoff faces \autocite{chernoff_use_1973}, variables linked to
    size of facial features for rapid cursory like-ness comparison of
    observations.
  \item
    Parallel coordinate plots \autocite{ocagne_coordonnees_1885}, where
    any number of variables are plotted in parallel with observations
    linked to their corresponding variable value by polylines.
  \item
    Scatterplot matrix \autocite{becker_brushing_1987}, showing a
    triangle matrix of bivariate scatterplots with 1D density on the
    diagonal.
  \item
    Radial glyphs, radial variants of parallel coordinates including
    radar, spider, and star glyphs \autocite{siegel_surgical_1972}.
  \end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Tour software
implementations}\label{tour-software-implementations}

Tours have not yet been widely adopted, this is likely due in part, to
the fact that print and static .pdf output does not accommodate dynamic
viewing. Conceptual abstraction and technically density have also
hampered user growth. Due to small adoption and rapid advancement of
technology support and maintenance of such implementations give them a
particularly short life span. Despite the small user base, there have
been a fair number of software implementing touring in some degree,
including:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  spinifex
  \href{https://github.com/nspyrison/spinifex}{github.com/nspyrison/spinifex}
  -- R package, all platforms.
\item
  tourr \autocite{wickham_tourr_2011} -- R package, all platforms.
\item
  CyrstalVision \autocite{wegman_visual_2003} -- for Windows.
\item
  GGobi \autocite{swayne_ggobi:_2003} -- for Linux and Windows.
\item
  DAVIS \autocite{huh_davis:_2002} -- Java based, with GUI.
\item
  ORCA \autocite{sutherland_orca:_2000} -- Extensible toolkit build in
  Java.
\item
  VRGobi \autocite{nelson_xgobi_1998} -- for use with the C2, tours in
  stereoscopic 3D displays.
\item
  ExplorN \autocite{carr_explorn:_1996} -- for SGI Unix.
\item
  XGobi \autocite{swayne_xgobi:_1991} -- for Linux, Unix, and Windows
  (via emulation).
\item
  XLispStat \autocite{tierney_lisp-stat:_1990} -- for Unix and Windows.
\item
  Explor4 \autocite{carr_explor4:_1988} -- Four-dimensional data using
  stereo-ray glyphs.
\item
  Prim-9 \autocites{asimov_grand_1985}{fisherkeller_prim-9:_1974} -- on
  an internal operating system.
\end{itemize}

\subsection{Research gaps}\label{research-gaps}

Currently there is no compiling software that offers UCS (\textbf{RO
\#1}). This leaves the class of dynamic linear projections without the
most precise, fine scale control of rotating \(p\)-space. This should be
reimplemented with an eye on extensibility and maintainability,

A comparative study outlining the benefits of UCS vs alternatives is
also absent from the literature (\textbf{RO \#2}). The benefits of
dynamic linear projections withhold in theory, but a direct comparison
with popular alternatives should be made. Barriers to adoption should
also be addressed such as: dynamic display is not easy on print and in
.pdf documents.

\section{Multivariate data visualization in 3D}\label{sec:3d}

As this research pertains to numeric multivariate data, a wider overview
of 3D data visualization is discussed in chapter 2 of
\textcite{marriott_immersive_2018}. Terminology for 3D visuals is in the
glossary section \ref{sec:3d-terminology}.

\subsection{A rocky start}\label{a-rocky-start}

Scientific visualization has readily adopted mixed realities as a large
amount of the science exist in 3 spatial dimensions, lending itself well
to virtual immersion \autocite{marriott_immersive_2018}. Data
visualization, on the other hand, has been slow to utilize graphics
above 2.5D, (and haptic interaction) primarily due to the mixed results
of over-hyped of 3D visuals from the 1980's and 90's
\autocite{munzner_visualization_2014}. However, since then there have
been several promising studies suggesting that it is time for data
visualization to revisit and adopt 3D visuals for specific combinations
of visuals and depth cues.

\subsection{3D rotated projections vs 3 2D orthogonal
projections}\label{d-rotated-projections-vs-3-2d-orthogonal-projections}

3D shapes can be represented by 3 orthogonal 2D views, or rather 3
pairwise projections. When 3D representations are used with binocular
cues, they are found to have more accurate perception than 2D
counterparts \autocite[depicted in figure
\ref{fig:lee86fig}]{lee_effects_1986}.




\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/lee86fig} 

}

\caption{Screen capture of ``Figure 7. 3-D Block Model'' from
\textcite{lee_effects_1986}.}\label{fig:lee86fig}
\end{figure}

Between 3D and split view 2D of 3-dimensional economics data
\textcite{wickens_implications_1994}, depicted in figure
\ref{fig:wickens94fig}, asked participants integrative questions,
finding that participants were faster to answer when questions involved
three dimensions, while performance was similar when questions involved
fewer dimensions.




\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/wickens94fig} 

}

\caption{Screen capture of ``Figure 5. Example of a mesh
display'' from \textcite{wickens_implications_1994}.}\label{fig:wickens94fig}
\end{figure}

Using 3D rotated projection gives more accurate perception (relative to
2D) of a ball suspended above complex box shapes, while combinations of
2D and 3D give the most precise orientation and positioning information
\autocite[depicted in figure
\ref{fig:tory06fig}]{tory_visualization_2006}.








\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.5\linewidth]{./figures/tory06fig} 

}

\caption{Screen capture from
\textcite{tory_visualization_2006}: ``Fig. 1 (a) 2D, (b) 3D Rotated, (c)
3D Shadow, (d) Orientation Icon, and (e) ExoVis displays used in
Experiment 1 (position estimation). Participants estimated the height of
the ball relative to the block shape. In this example, the ball is at
height 1.5 diameters above the block shape.''}\label{fig:tory06fig}
\end{figure}

\textcite{sedlmair_empirical_2013}, depicted in figure
\ref{fig:sedlmair13fig}, tasked users with cluster separation across 2D
scatterplot, 2D scatterplot matrices (SPLOMs) and interactive 3D
scatterplots as viewed in monocular 3D from a standard monitor. They
conclude that interactive 3D scatterplots perform worse for class
separation. This result is surprisingly as the extra dimension
theoretically allows for clustering structure to be seen and explored
more clearly.














\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{./figures/sedlmair13fig} 

}

\caption{Screen capture of ``Figure 5. Example of a mesh
display'' from \textcite{sedlmair_empirical_2013}: ``Fig. 5. (a)-(d):
Screenshots of the entangled dataset \texttt{entangled1-3d-3cl-separate}
designed to show the most possible benefits for i3D. (a),(b) two
viewpoints of the same i3D PCA scatterplot. An accompanying video shows
the full 3D rotation. (c) 2D PCA projection. (d) t-SNE untangles this
class structure in 2D. (e)-(f): 2D scatterplots of the reduced
\texttt{entangled2-15d-adjacent} dataset which we designed to have a
ground truth entangled class structure in 15D. (e) Glimmer MDS cannot
untangle the classes, neither can PCA and robPCA (see supplemental
material). (f) t-SNE nicely untangles and separates the ground truth
classes in 2D.''}\label{fig:sedlmair13fig}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Comparing 3D and 2D embeddings of multivariate
data}\label{comparing-3d-and-2d-embeddings-of-multivariate-data}

\textcite{nelson_xgobi_1998}, depicted in figure \ref{fig:nelson98fig},
had \(n=15\) participants perform brushing and touring tasks
(identification of clusters, structure, and data dimensionality) in 3D
with head-tracked binocular VR. 3D proved to have substantial advantage
for cluster identification and some advantage in identifying shape.
Brushing did take longer in VR, perhaps due to the lower familiarity of
manipulating 3D spaces.







\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/nelson98fig} 

}

\caption{Screen capture from \textcite{nelson_xgobi_1998}:
``Figure 4: This is a picture of a 3-D room, running VRGobi. Data is
plotted in the center, with painting tools to the right and variable
spheres to the left. In the viewing box the data can be seen to contain
three clusters, and one is being brushed.''}\label{fig:nelson98fig}
\end{figure}

Another study, \textcite{gracia_new_2016}, depicted in figure
\ref{fig:gracia16fig}, performed dimensionality reduction down to 2- and
3D scatterplots, both displayed in monocular 3D on a standard monitor.
Users were found to more accurately compare distances between points and
identify outliers on 3D scatterplots. However, both tasks were performed
slower with use of the 3D scatterplots and statistical significance was
not reported.









\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.7\linewidth]{./figures/gracia16fig} 

}

\caption{Screen capture from \textcite{gracia_new_2016}:
``Figure 5. Distance perception test. Left-hand image: 2D version. Here,
the yellow line could be perceived as roughly twice the length of the
magenta line, thus the value to be introduced should be approximately
2.0. Right-hand image: 3D version. Here, the inclusion of an extra
dimension could provide new information about the relation, in terms of
distances, between both lines.''}\label{fig:gracia16fig}
\end{figure}

\textcite{wagner_filho_immersive_2018}, depicted in figure
\ref{fig:wagner18fig}, performed an \(n=30\) empirical study of PCA
embedded projections, and perception error across 4 tasks and 3 display
types: 2D, 3D, and immersive. Overall task error was less in 3D and
immersive relative to 2D. According to the user Likert-scale survey 2D
is slightly easier to navigate and slightly more comfortable, while, 3D
and immersive display are slightly easier to interact and moderately
easier to find information.





\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.5\linewidth]{./figures/wagner18fig} 

}

\caption{Screen capture from
\textcite{wagner_filho_immersive_2018}, original captions contained in
capture.}\label{fig:wagner18fig}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Immersive analytics platform in
VR}\label{immersive-analytics-platform-in-vr}

Immersive analytics is a emerging technology where data visualization
and analysis is facilitated in an intuitive, immersive virtual reality
environment. An example of which is shown in
\textcite{cordeil_imaxes:_2017} introduces a collaborative space for
immersive data analysis. Where axes are displayed and intuitively
interacted with while respond to proximity to other variable axes and
popping into place changing the resulting geometric display. For
example, three variables can be placed as the \(x,~y,~z\) axis for a 3D
scatterplot or stood up right next to each other for a parallel
coordinate plot. The subsequent work in
\textcite{cordeil_immersive_2019} builds from the previous reference,
and refines it for the next iteration in interactive, scalable data
visualization in virtual spaces.




\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.5\linewidth]{./figures/cordeil2017fig} 

}

\caption{Screen capture of figure 15 from
\textcite{cordeil_imaxes:_2017}.}\label{fig:cordeil2017fig}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Research gaps}\label{research-gaps-1}

When comparing between 3D and 2D orthogonal views studies in general
show that perception accuracy is better in 3D, though manipulation speed
is generally slower. The speed discrepancy is confounded by the
difference in users familiar with manipulating 2D vs 3D spaces
\autocites{lee_effects_1986}{wickens_implications_1994}{tory_visualization_2006}[counter
example][]{sedlmair_empirical_2013}.

Similar results have been shown in static, 3D projected spaces
\autocites{gracia_new_2016}{wagner_filho_immersive_2018} and in dynamic
\(d=2\) embedded spaces depicted in immersive 3D
\autocite{nelson_xgobi_1998}. The literature stops short of the dynamic
\(d=3\) linear projections. With Modern VR hardware advancement, so too
does the, quality, resolution, and prevalence of VR advance, making VR
more easily accessible than ever. It's time to view dynamic 3D
projections with immersive spaces and quantify the corresponding
benefits (\textbf{RO \#3 \& 4}).

\chapter{Project overview}\label{ch:projectoverview}

The research gaps in the literature review leave room for the research
objectives outlined in the introduction. Figure
\ref{fig:ProjectOverview} depicts a schematic flow chart that the
research objectives will be executed in. RO \#1, application of 2D
user-controlled steering (UCS), sets the foundation for which the other
objectives can be researched. RO \#3, the application of 3D UCS, must
precede RO \#4, exploring the efficacy of 3D UCS across display devices.
RO \#2, the comparison of 2D UCS vs alternatives, must come after RO
\#1, but is of lower priority to RO \#3 \& 4, and so will be conducted
last, in the event of a time crunch.




\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{./figures/ProjectOverview} 

}

\caption{Flow chart of research objective (RO)
dependencies, work order, and methodology.}\label{fig:ProjectOverview}
\end{figure}

\chapter{Completed work}\label{ch:completed_work}

Implementing UCS in low dimensions is fundamental to the extension of
the UCS into 3D space. The implementation of such, forms the foundation
for future work addressed in the remaining research objectives.

\section{RO \#1) How can UCS be implemented in 1- and 2D
projections?}\label{ro-1-how-can-ucs-be-implemented-in-1--and-2d-projections}

This section covers the work done in the last year implementing USC via
\emph{manual tours}. Following experimental design methodology this work
implements the manual tour as described in \textcite{cook_manual_1997}
and allows users to rotate a selected variable into and out of a 2D
projection of high-dimensional space for user-controlled steering (UCS).
The primary use is to determine the sensitivity of structure visible in
a projection to the contributions of a variable. This is particularly
powerful for exploring the local structure once a feature of interest
has been identified by a guided tour \autocite{cook_grand_1995} for
example. The algorithm for a manual tour allows rotations in horizontal,
vertical, oblique, angular and radial directions. In the algorithm below
focuses on radial rotation.

Section \ref{sec:algorithm} explains the algorithm using a toy dataset.
A wider discussion of implementation as an \emph{R} package and
application to high energy physics data
\autocites{wang_visualizing_2018}{cook_dynamical_2018} is attached in
appendix \ref{ch:spinifex_paper} formatted as a paper that will be
submitted to The R Journal.

\section{Algorithm}\label{sec:algorithm}

Creating a manual tour animation requires these steps:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Provided with a 2D projection, choose a variable to explore. This is
  called the ``manip'' variable.
\item
  Create a 3D manipulation space, where the manip variable has full
  contribution.
\item
  Generate a rotation sequence which zeros coefficient and increases it
  to 1 before returning to the initial position.
\end{enumerate}

These steps are described in more detail below.

\subsection{Notation}\label{notation}

Start with multivariate data in an \(n \times p\) numeric matrix, and an
orthonormal \(d\)-dimensional basis set is describing the projection
from \(p-\) to \(d-\)space.

\begin{align*}
  \textbf{X}_{[n,~p]} ~=
  \begin{bmatrix}
    X_{1,~1} & \dots  & X_{1,~p} \\
    X_{2,~1} & \dots  & X_{2,~p} \\
    \vdots   & \ddots & \vdots   \\
    X_{n,~1} & \dots  & X_{n,~p}
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}

\begin{align*}
  \textbf{B}_{[p,~d]} ~=
  \begin{bmatrix}
    B_{1,~1} & \dots  & B_{1,~d} \\
    B_{2,~1} & \dots  & B_{2,~d} \\
    \vdots   & \ddots & \vdots   \\
    B_{p,~1} & \dots  & B_{p,~d}
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}

The algorithm is primarily operating on the projection basis and
utilizes the data only when making a display for computational
efficiency. A more comprehensive list of tour notation is given in
\ref{sec:tour_notation}.

\subsection{Toy data set}\label{toy-data-set}

The flea data from \textcite{lubischew_use_1962} will be used as an
example dataset. The data contains 74 observations across 6 variables,
corresponding to physical measurements of the insects. Each observation
belonging to one of three species.

A guided tour on the flea data is conducted by optimizing on the
\texttt{holes} index \autocite{cook_interactive_2007}. In a guided tour
the data the projection sequence is shown by optimizing an index of
interest. The \texttt{holes} index is maximized by when the projected
data has a lack of observations in the center. Figure \ref{fig:step0},
shows an optimal projection of this data. The left plot displays the
projection basis, while the right plot shows the projected data. The
display of the basis has a unit circle with lines showing the horizontal
and vertical contributions of each variable in the projection. Here is
primarily \texttt{tars1} and \texttt{aede2} contrasting the other four
variables. In the projected data there are three clusters, which have
been colored, although not used in the optimization. The question that
will be explored in the explanation of the algorithm is how important is
\texttt{aede2} to the separation of the clusters.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=0.98\linewidth]{thesis_files/figure-latex/step0-1} 

}

\caption{Basis reference frame (left) and projected data (right) of standardized flea data. Basis identified by holes-index guided tour. The variables `aede2` and `tars1` contribute mostly in the X direction, whereas the other variables contribute mostly in the Y direction. Select `aede2` as the manipulation variable to see how the structure of the projection changes.}\label{fig:step0}
\end{figure}

The left frame of figure \ref{fig:step0} shows the reference frame for
the basis. It describes the X and Y contributions of the basis as it
projects from the 6 variable dimensions down to 2. The right side shows
how the data looks projected through this basis. You can project a
single basis at any time through the matrix multiplication
\(\textbf{X}_{[n,~p]} ~*~ \textbf{B}_{[p,~d]} ~=~ \textbf{P}_{[n,~d]}\)
to such effect.

\subsection{Step 1 Choose variable of
interest}\label{step-1-choose-variable-of-interest}

Select a manipulation variable, \(k\). Initialize a zero vector \(e\)
and set the \(k\)-th element set to 1.

\begin{align*}
\textbf{e}_{[p,~1]} ~=~
  \begin{bmatrix}
    0 \\
    0 \\
    \vdots \\
    1 \\
    \vdots \\
    0
  \end{bmatrix}
\end{align*}

In figure \ref{fig:step0}, above, notice that the variables
\texttt{tars1} and \texttt{aede2} are almost orthogonal to the other 4
variables and control almost all of the variation in the x axis of the
projection. \texttt{Aede2} has a larger contribution and is select it as
the manip variable.

\subsection{Step 2 Create the manip
space}\label{step-2-create-the-manip-space}

Use the Gram-Schmidt process to orthonormalize the concatenation of the
basis and \(e\) yielding the manip space.

\begin{align*}
  \textbf{M}_{[p,~d+1]}
  &= Orthonormalize_{GS}( \textbf{B}_{[p,~d]}|\textbf{e}_{[p,~1]} ) \\
  &= Orthonormalize_{GS}
  \left(
    \begin{bmatrix}
      B_{1,~1} & \dots  & B_{1,~d} \\
      B_{2,~1} & \dots  & B_{2,~d} \\
      \vdots   & \ddots & \vdots   \\
      B_{k,~1} & \dots  & B_{k,~d} \\
      \vdots   & \ddots & \vdots   \\
      B_{p,~1} & \dots  & B_{p,~d}
    \end{bmatrix}
  ~|~
    \begin{bmatrix}
      0 \\
      0 \\
      \vdots \\
      1 \\
      \vdots \\
      0
    \end{bmatrix}
  \right)
\end{align*}

Adding an extra dimension to our basis plane allows for the manipulation
of the specified variable. Orthonormalizing rescales the new vector,
while leaving the first \(d\) variables identical to the basis. An
illustration of such can been seen below in figure \ref{fig:step2}.

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=1\linewidth]{thesis_files/figure-latex/step2-1} 

}

\caption{Manipulation space for controlling the contribution of aede2 of standardized flea data. Basis was identified by holes-index guided tour. The out of plane axis, in red, shows how the manipulation variable can be rotated, while other dimensions stay embedded within the basis plane.}\label{fig:step2}
\end{figure}

Imagine being able to grab hold of the red axis and rotate it changing
the projection onto the basis plane. This is what happens in a manual
tour. For a radial tour, fix \(\theta\), the angle within the blue
plane, and vary the \(\phi\), the angle orthogonal to the blue
projection plane. The user controlling these angles changes the values
of the coefficient the manip variable and performs a constrained
rotation on the remaining variables.

\subsection{Step 3 Generate rotation}\label{step-3-generate-rotation}

Define a set of values for \(\phi_i\), the angle of out of plane
rotation, orthogonal to the projection plane. This corresponds to the
angle between the red manipulation axis and the blue plane in figure
\ref{fig:step2}.

\textbf{For } \(i\) \textbf{in 1 to n\_slides:}

For each \(\phi_i\), post multiply the manipulation space by a rotation
matrix, producing, \textbf{RM}, the rotated manip space.

\begin{align*}
  \textbf{RM}_{[p,~d+1,~i]}
  &= \textbf{M}_{[p,~d+1]} ~*~ \textbf{R}_{[d+1,~d+1]}
    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~\text{For the $d=2$ case:} \\
  &= \begin{bmatrix}
    M_{1,~1} & \dots & M_{1,~d} & M_{1,~d+1} \\
    M_{2,~1} & \dots & M_{2,~d} & M_{2,~d+1} \\
    \vdots   & \ddots& \vdots   \\
    M_{p,~1} & \dots & M_{p,~d} & M_{p,~d+1}
  \end{bmatrix}_{[p,~d+1]}
    ~*~
  \begin{bmatrix}
    c_\theta^2 c_\phi s_\theta^2 &
    -c_\theta s_\theta (1 - c_\phi) &
    -c_\theta s_\phi \\
    -c_\theta s_\theta (1 - c_\phi) &
    s_\theta^2 c_\phi + c_\theta^2 &
    -s_\theta s_\phi \\
    c_\theta s_\phi &
    s_\theta s_\phi &
    c_\phi
  \end{bmatrix}_{[3,~3]}
\end{align*}

Where:

\begin{description}
  \item[$\theta$] is the angle that lies on the projection plane ($ie.$ on the $xy$ plane)
  \item[$\phi$] is the angle orthogonal to the projection plane ($ie.$ in the $z$, direction)
  \item[$c_\theta$] is the cosine of $\theta$
  \item[$c_\phi$]   is the cosine of $\phi$
  \item[$s_\theta$] is the sine of   $\theta$
  \item[$s_\phi$]   is the sine of   $\phi$
\end{description}

In application: compile the sequence of \(\phi_i\) and create an array
for each rotated manipulation space. \(\phi\) is the angle of change
relative to the \(\phi_1\), the transformation \(\phi_i\) - \(\phi_1\)
to useful to think about \(\phi\) relative to the basis plane. If the
manip variable doesn't move as expected this is the first place to
check.

Figure \ref{fig:step3} illustrates the sequence with 15 projected bases
and highlight the manip variable on top, while showing the corresponding
projected data points on the bottom. A dynamic version of this tour can
be viewed online at
\url{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/flea_manualtour_mvar5/}, (may
take a moment to load).








\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6in,height=7.2in]{thesis_files/figure-latex/step3-1} 

}

\caption{Rotated manipulation spaces, a radial manual tour
manipulating \texttt{aded2} of standardized flea data. The manipulation
variable, \texttt{aede2}, extends from its initial contribution to a
full contribution to the projection before decreasing to zero, and then
returning to its initial state. A dynamic version can be viewed at
\url{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/flea_manualtour_mvar5/}.}\label{fig:step3}
\end{figure}

\section{Display projection sequence}\label{display-projection-sequence}

To get back to data-space pre-multiply the rotated manip space by the
data for the projection in data-space.

\begin{align}
  \textbf{P}_{[n,~d+1]}
    &= \textbf{X}_{[n,~p]} ~*~ \textbf{RM}_{[p,~d+1]} \\
    &=
      \begin{bmatrix}
          X_{1,~1} & \dots & X_{1,~p} \\
          X_{2,~1} & \dots & X_{2,~p} \\
          \vdots   & \vdots & \vdots  \\
          X_{n,~1} & \dots & X_{n,~p}
      \end{bmatrix}_{[n,~p]}
      ~*~
      \begin{bmatrix}
        RM_{1,~1} & RM_{1,~2} & RM_{1,~3} \\
        RM_{2,~1} & RM_{2,~2} & RM_{2,~3} \\
        \vdots    & \vdots    & \vdots    \\
        RM_{p,~1} & RM_{p,~2} & RM_{p,~3}
      \end{bmatrix}_{[p,~d+1]}
\end{align}

Plot the first \(d=2\) variables from each projection in sequence for an
XY scatterplot. The remaining variable is sometimes linked to a data
point aesthetic to produce depth cues used in conjunction with the XY
scatterplot.

\subsection{Storage and sharing}\label{storage-and-sharing}

Storing each data point for every frame with the overhead dynamic
graphics is very inefficient. In the same way that efficiency is gain by
performing math on the bases, the same approach suggested for storage
and sharing tours. Consider a radial manual tour, the salient features
can be stored in 3 bases, where \(\phi\) is at its starting, minimum,
and maximum values. The frames in between can be interpolated later by
supplying angular speed.

\chapter{Future work}\label{ch:future_work}

\section{RO \#2) Does 2D UCS provide benefits over
alternatives?}\label{ro-2-does-2d-ucs-provide-benefits-over-alternatives}

High dimensional data and models are ubiquitous but viewing them in data
space is not trivial. This work quanifies various measurements of 2D UCS
implemented in RO \#1, and commonly used alternatives. All comparison
groups are unsupervised (agnostic of clustering) static, single
embeddings in lower dimension of the data, and would include:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{Principal Component Analysis (PCA)}, is a linear
  transformation that orients linear combinations of the variables into
  basis components and orders them according to amount of variation. The
  first principal component is the linear combination that explains the
  most variation with the second explaining the most of the remaining
  variation and is orthogonal to the all previous components, and so on.
\item
  \textbf{Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS)}, non-linear dimension
  reduction that compares pairwise distances between observations.
\item
  \textbf{t-distributed neighbor embeddings (tSNE)}, a nonlinear
  technique that iterates epochs of: 1) constructing a probability
  distributions for selecting neighboring data and 2), minimizing
  Kullback-Leibler divergence (a measure of relative entropy).
\end{itemize}

Unfortunately, static linear projections necessarily cut variation in
the components not shown, while non-linear techniques lose transparency
back to the original variable-space. Tours preserve this transparency to
variable-space and keeps variation in tack. Providing user-controlled
steering of tour should allow for finer structural exploration than the
alternatives.

The tentative methodology for this future work is a \textbf{case study}
between UCS and leading alternatives. This will be a sufficient
comparison if there are enough quantifiable measurements across the
different techniques. However, if enough measurements are not comparable
across technique an empirical study analogous to the study suggested in
RO \# 4 will be considered. Design space includes data sets, techniques,
and measures of comparison.

\section{RO \#3) How can UCS be extended to
3D?}\label{ro-3-how-can-ucs-be-extended-to-3d}

The literature has shown positive results for improved accuracy and
precision for 3D displays. Dynamic linear projections should have
similar gains in \(d=2\) projections, and the additional dimension
should allow for improved perception of surfaces and dynamic viewing of
\(d=3\) projections. The work done in RO \#1) will be extended to these
uses.

The work done in \textcite{cordeil_imaxes:_2017} creates a collaborative
space for people to engage in immersive data analysis. The subsequent
\textcite{cordeil_immersive_2019} created the immersive analytics
toolkit (IATK), which generalized data visualization in the Unity game
engine. By integrating dynamic linear touring in 3D with the IATK offers
a consolidated user interface that can be used across various display
devices in RO \#4.

This is an \textbf{exploratory design}, first the \emph{R} package
spinifex will be extended to 3D, and then calling it via the
\emph{Unity} package IATK for rendering in 3D VR and offers a compatible
front end to be used across display devices.

\section{RO \#4) Does UCS in 3D displays provide perception benefits
over 2D displays?}\label{UCS_3dvs2d}

The bulk of past touring endeavors have existed whole in 2D, with the
exceptions of \textcite{nelson_xgobi_1998} and
\textcite{arms_benefits_1999} whom performed a small (\(n=15\))
experimental study comparing tasks performed across 2D and 3D touring
displays. The XGobi interface was used on a standard 2D monitor while
VRGobi (on the C2 setup) was used with head-tracked binocular VR. The 3
accuracy tasks: clustering, intrinsic data dimensionality, and radial
sparseness were recorded along with the speed of a brushing data.
Accuracy was the same for the dimensionality task, while 3D display
outperformed 2D on clustering, and even more so on the radial sparsity.
However, time taken to brush a cluster was less than half the time in 2D
display as compared with 3D.

The results of \textcite{wagner_filho_immersive_2018},
\textcite{nelson_xgobi_1998} and, \textcite{arms_benefits_1999} cast
positive light on 3D spaces improving the perception of embeddings of
high-dimensional data, while others have found the same for data already
in three dimensions. After implementing touring and UCS in 3D spaces (RO
\#3), the next step is to quantify the effects across display type.

I plan to test the efficacy of doing so with the following
\textbf{empirical study}: \emph{randomized full factorial design}, where
every participant will complete every task on every display device. Task
order and display device will be randomly assigned to minimize learning
bias. Correctness and speed of tasks will be recorded alongside
demographic data and subjective 5-point Likert scale survey. A
lineup-type model as outlined in \textcite{hofmann_graphical_2012} may
be employed to quantify ``best'' display device.

Tasks will test perception of structure and surface, varying across
manipulation variable. All tasks will be conducted across at least three
display devices: standard 2D monitor, stereoscopic 3D monitor (on a
zSpace 200), and head-mounted VR goggles (HTC VIVE). User interface will
be standardized across display device. The data explored will be of high
energy physics experiments already being discussed in publication
\autocites{wang_visualizing_2018}{cook_dynamical_2018} and looked at in
2D UCS in appendix \ref{ch:spinifex_paper}.

\chapter{PhD schedule}\label{ch:timeline}

\section{Timeline}\label{timeline}

\begin{center}\includegraphics{thesis_files/figure-latex/timeline-1} \end{center}

\emph{Note RO \#2 logically would fit before RO \#3 \& 4, but is of
lower impact and retrospective case study. I move this research to the
end to give the other research objectives the priority.}

\section{Accompanying documents}\label{accompanying-documents}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  FIT 5144 hours

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    \textgreater{}120 hours \textbf{Tracked, awaiting mandatory events},
    due at mid-candidature review
  \end{itemize}
\item
  WES Academic record

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    FIT6021: 2018 S2, \textbf{Completed} with Distinction
  \item
    FIT5144: 2019 S1+2, \textbf{Upcoming}, due at mid-candidature review
  \item
    FIT5113: 2018 S2, \textbf{Exemption submitted}, forwarded 14/02/2019
  \end{itemize}
\item
  myDevelopment - IT: Monash Doctoral Program - Compulsory Module

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    Monash Graduate Research Student Induction: \textbf{Completed}
  \item
    Research Integrity - Choose the Option most relevant:
    \textbf{Completed} (2 required of 4)
  \item
    Faculty Induction: \textbf{Content unavailable} (25/02/2019:
    ``Currently being updated and will be visible in this section
    soon'')
  \end{itemize}
\end{itemize}

\chapter{Source code}\label{sec:source}

This article was created in \texttt{R} \autocite{r_core_team_r:_2018},
using \texttt{bookdown} \autocite{xie_bookdown:_2016} and
\texttt{rmarkdown} \autocite{xie_r_2018}, with code generating the
examples inline.

Following good practice of version control and reproduction, the source
files can be found at:
\href{https://github.com/nspyrison/Confirmation}{github.com/nspyrison/confirmation/}.

\appendix

\chapter{Glossary}\label{ch:glossary}

\section{Tour notation}\label{sec:tour_notation}

Terminology varies across articles. In my work, I use the following:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \(n\), number of observations in the data.
\item
  \(p\), number of numeric variables, the dimensionality of data space.
\item
  \(d\), dimensionality of projection space.
\item
  \(\textbf{X}_{[n,~p]}\), a data matrix in variable-space,
  \(\textbf{X} \in \mathbb{R}^{p}\). Typically centered, scaled, and
  optionally sphered.
\item
  \(\textbf{B}_{[p,~d]}\), orthonormal basis set (\(d\) linear
  combinations of \(p\) variables, each at a right angle, to the others,
  with a norm of 1), defining the axes directions for the projection
  from \(p-\) to \(d-\)space.
\item
  \(\textbf{Y}_{[n,~d]}\), projected data matrix in projection-space,
  \(\textbf{Y} \in \mathbb{R}^{d}\).
\item
  For projections down to 1- and 2D, it is common to display each
  variables contribution and direction on its own axis (1D) or relative
  to a unit circle (2D), this is referred to as basis axes or sometimes
  the reference frame.
\item
  Geometric objects are referred to in generalized dimensions; the use
  of plane is not necessarily a 2D surface, but a hyper-plane in the
  arbitrary dimensions of the projection space.
\end{itemize}

\section{Data visualization terminology}\label{sec:3d-terminology}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  2D - representation of data in 2 dimensions, without use of depth
  perception cues and minimal aesthetic mapping (such as color, size,
  and height) to data points.
\item
  2.5D - Following the definition given in
  \textcite{ware_designing_2000}: visualizations that are essentially 2D
  but select depth cues are used to provide some suggestion of 3D.
  However, the term 2.5D is commonly used for several meanings \emph{due
  to the ambiguous use of 2.5D, this document errs on the side stating
  3D with descriptions of depth cues used}.
\item
  3D - visualizations of 3 dimensions with a liberal use of depth cues
  unless otherwise qualified.
\item
  Depth perception cues - an indication that indicates depth to an
  observer, including:

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    linear perspective - the property of parallel lines converging on a
    vanishing point.
  \item
    aerial perspective - objects that are far away have lower contrast
    and color saturation due to light scattering in the atmosphere.
  \item
    occulation (or interposition) - where closer objects partially block
    the view of further objects.
  \item
    motion perspective/parallax - closer objects, move across the field
    of view faster than further objects.
  \item
    accommodation - the change of focal length due to change in the
    shape of the eye. Effective for distances of less than 2 meters.
  \item
    binocular stereopsis/disparity - the use of 2 images of slightly
    varied angles from the horizontal distance of the eyes. The
    disparity for distant objects is small, but it is significant for
    nearby objects.
  \item
    binocular convergence - The ocular-motor cue due to stereopsis
    focusing on the same objects. Convergence is effective for distances
    up to 10 meters.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  Virtual reality (VR) - computer generated display of virtual spaces in
  place of physical vision.
\item
  Augmented reality (AR) - computer generated display of information
  overlaid on a physical space.
\item
  Mixed reality (MR) - any degree of virtual or augmented reality.
\item
  Scatterplot matrices (SPLOM) - matrix display of pair-wise 2D
  scatterplots with 1D density on the diagonal.
\end{itemize}

\chapter{Using animation to explore sensitivity of structure in a
low-dimensional projection of high-dimensional data with user controlled
steering}\label{ch:spinifex_paper}

\emph{The content contained in this appendix document is work done in
the last year of my research and currently formatted as a paper to be
submitted to the R Journal.}

\section{Abstract}\label{abstract-1}

The tour algorithm, and its various versions provide a systematic
approach to viewing low-dimensional projections of high-dimensional
data. It is particularly useful for understanding multivariate data, and
useful in association with techniques for dimension reduction,
supervised and unsupervised classification. The \emph{R} package
\emph{tourr} provides many methods for conducting tours on multivariate
data. This paper discusses an extension package which adds support for
the manual tour, called \emph{spinifex}. It is particularly usefully for
exploring the sensitivity of structure discovered in a projection by a
guided tour, to the contribution of a variable. \emph{Spinifex} utilizes
the animation packages \emph{plotly} and \emph{gganimation} to allow
users to rotate the selected variable into and out of a chosen
projection.

Keywords: grand tour, projection pursuit, manual tour, high dimensional
data, multivariate data, data visualization, statistical graphics, data
science, data mining.

\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}

A tour is a multivariate data analysis technique in which is a sequence
of linear (orthogonal) projections into a lower subspace in which
\(p-\)space is rotated across time. Each frame of the sequence
corresponds to a small change in the projection for a smooth transition
to persevere the object continuity.

Multivariate data analysis can be broken into 2 groups: linear and
non-linear transformations. Like PCA and LDA, touring uses linear
dimension reduction that maintain transparency back to the original
variable-space. PCA and LDA are typically represented with single static
projection as a 2- or 3D scatterplot, inherently losing the variation
held with the high components, whereas touring keeps the information in
tack by showing the other components across time. Non-linear
transformations such as tSNE (t-distributed stochastic nearest neighbor
embeddings), MDS (multi-dimension scaling), and LLE (local linear
embedding) distort the parameter-space which lacks transparency back to
the original parameter-space. They show more extreme separation in
embeddings, but the variable opacity can be a non-starter for many uses.

There are many ways that a tour path can be generated, we will focus on
one, the manual tour. The manual tour was described in
\textcite{cook_manual_1997} and allows a user to rotate a variable into
and out of a 2D projection of high-dimensional space. This will be
called user-controlled steering (UCS). The primary purpose is to
determine the sensitivity of structure visible in a projection to the
contributions of a variable. Manual touring can also be useful for
exploring the local structure once a feature of interest has been
identified, for example, by a guided tour \autocite{cook_grand_1995}.
The algorithm for a manual tour allows rotations in horizontal,
vertical, oblique, angular and radial directions. Rotation in a radial
direction, would pull a variable into and out of the projection, which
allows for examining the sensitivity of structure in the projection to
the contribution of this variable. This type of manual rotation is the
focus of this paper.

A manual tour relies on user input, and thus has been difficult to
program in R. Ideally, the mouse movements of the user are captured, and
passed to the computations, driving the rotation interactively. However,
this type of interactivity is not simple in R. This has been the reason
that the algorithm was not incorporated into the \emph{tourr} package.
Spinifex utilizes two new animation packages, \emph{plotly}
\autocite{sievert_plotly_2018} and \emph{gganimate}
\autocite{pedersen_gganimate:_2019}, to display manual tours or other
saved tours. From a given projection, the user can choose which variable
to control, and the animation sequence is generated to remove the
variable from the projection, and then extend its contribution to be the
sole variable in one direction. This allows the viewer to assess the
change in structure induced in the projection by the variable's
contribution.

The paper is organized as follows. Section \ref{sec:algorithm} explains
the algorithm using a toy dataset. Section \ref{sec:application}
illustrates how this can be used for sensitivity analysis. The last
section, \ref{sec:discussion_paper} summarizes the work and discusses
future research.

\section{Algorithm}\label{sec:algorithm_paper}

\emph{Algorithm and example is discussed above in section
\ref{sec:algorithm} and is purposefully removed here.}

--\textgreater{}

\section{Application}\label{sec:application}

In a recent paper, \textcite{wang_visualizing_2018}, the authors
aggregate and visualize the sensitivity of hadronic experiments. The
authors introduce a new tool, PDFSense, to aid in the visualization of
parton distribution functions (PDF). The parameter-space of these
experiments lies in 56 dimensions, \(\delta \in \mathbb{R}^{56}\), and
are presented in this work in 3D subspaces of the 10 first principal
components and non-linear embeddings.

The work in \textcite{cook_dynamical_2018} applies touring for discern
finer structure of this sensitivity. Table 1 of Cook et. al. summaries
the key findings of PDFSense \& TFEP (TensorFlow embedded projection)
and those from touring. The authors selected the 6 first principal
components, containing 48\% of the variation held within the full data
when centered, but not sphered. This data contained 3 clusters: jet,
DIS, and VBP. Below pick up from the projections used in their figures 7
and 8 (jet and DIS clusters respectively) and apply manual tours to
explore the local structure with finer precision.

\subsection{Jet cluster}\label{jet-cluster}

The jet cluster is of particular interest as it contains the largest
data sets and is found to be important in
\textcite{wang_visualizing_2018}. The jet cluster resides in a smaller
dimensionality than the full set of experiments with 4 principal
components explaining 95\% of its variation
\autocite{cook_dynamical_2018}. We subset the data down to ATLAS7old and
ATLAS7new to narrow in on 2 groups with a reasonable number of
observations and occupy different parts of the subspace. Below, we
perform radial manual tours on various principal components within this
scope. In PC3 and PC4 are manipulated in figure \ref{fig:JetClusterGood}
and figure \ref{fig:JetClusterBad} respectively. Manipulating PC3, where
varying the angle of rotation brings interesting features in-to and out
of the center mass of the data, is interesting than the manipulation of
PC4, where features are mostly independent of the manip var.










\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6in,height=7.2in]{thesis_files/figure-latex/JetClusterGood-1} 

}

\caption{Jet cluster, radial manual tour of PC3. Colored
by experiment type: `ATLAS7new' in green and `ATLAS7old' in orange. When
PC3 fully contributes to the projection ATLAS7new (green) occupies
unique space and several outliers are identifiable. Zeroing the
contribution from PC3 to the projection hides the outliers and indeed
all observations with ATLAS7new are contained within ATLAS7old (orange).
A dynamic version can be viewed at
\url{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/jetcluster_manualtour_pc3/}.}\label{fig:JetClusterGood}
\end{figure}









\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6in,height=7.2in]{thesis_files/figure-latex/JetClusterBad-1} 

}

\caption{Jet cluster, radial manual tour of PC4. Colored
by experiment type: `ATLAS7new' in green and `ATLAS7old' in orange. This
tour contains less interesting information ATLAS7new (green) has points
that are right and left of ATLAS7old, while most points occupy the same
projection space, regardless of the contribution of PC4. A dynamic
version can be viewed at
\url{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/jetcluster_manualtour_pc3/}.}\label{fig:JetClusterBad}
\end{figure}

Jet cluster manual tours manipulating each of the principal components
can be viewed from the links:
\href{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/jetcluster_manualtour_pc1/}{PC1},
\href{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/jetcluster_manualtour_pc2/}{PC2},
\href{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/jetcluster_manualtour_pc3/}{PC3},
and
\href{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/jetcluster_manualtour_pc4/}{PC4}.

\subsection{DIS cluster}\label{dis-cluster}

We perform a manual tour on this data, manipulating PC6 as depicted in
figure \ref{fig:DISclusterGood}. Looking at several frames we see that
DIS HERA lie mostly on a plane. When PC6 has full contributions, we see
the dimuon SIDIS in purple is almost orthogonal to the DIS HERA (green).
Yet the contribution of PC6 is zeroed the dimuon SIDIS data occupy the
same space as the DIS HERA data. A dynamic version of this manual tour
can be found at:
\url{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/discluster_manualtour_pc6/}.
The page takes a bit to load, as the animation is several megabytes.











\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6in,height=7.2in]{thesis_files/figure-latex/DISclusterGood-1} 

}

\caption{DIS cluster, radial manual tour of PC6. colored
by experiment type: `DIS HERA1+2' in green, `dimuon SIDIS' in purple,
and `charm SIDIS' in orange. When the contribution PC 6 is large we see
that dimuon SIDIS (purple) data are nearly orthogonal to DIS HERA
(green) data. As the data is rotated, we can also see that DIS HERA
(green) practically lie on a plane in this 6-d subspace. When the
contribution of PC6 is near zero, dimonSIDIS (purple) occupies the same
space as the DIS HERA data. A dynamic version can be viewed at
\url{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/discluster_manualtour_pc6/}.}\label{fig:DISclusterGood}
\end{figure}

This is different story than if we had selected a different variable to
manipulate. In figure \ref{fig:DISclusterBad} we manipulate PC2.










\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=6in,height=7.2in]{thesis_files/figure-latex/DISclusterBad-1} 

}

\caption{DIS cluster, radial manual tour of PC2. Colored
by experiment type: `DIS HERA1+2' in green, `dimuon SIDIS' in purple,
and `charm SIDIS' in orange. The structure of previously described plane
of DIS HERA (green) and nearly orthogonal dimuon SIDIS (purple) is
present, however the manipulating PC2 does not give a head-on view of
either, a less useful manual tour than that of PC6. A dynamic version
can be viewed at
\url{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/discluster_manualtour_pc2/}.}\label{fig:DISclusterBad}
\end{figure}

DIS cluster manual tours manipulating each of the principal components
can be viewed from the links:
\href{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/discluster_manualtour_pc1/}{PC1},
\href{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/discluster_manualtour_pc2/}{PC2},
\href{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/discluster_manualtour_pc3/}{PC3},
\href{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/discluster_manualtour_pc4/}{PC4},
\href{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/discluster_manualtour_pc5/}{PC5},
and
\href{https://nspyrison.netlify.com/thesis/discluster_manualtour_pc6/}{PC6}.

\section{Source code and usage}\label{source-code-and-usage}

This article was created in \texttt{R} \autocite{r_core_team_r:_2018},
using \texttt{bookdown} \autocite{xie_bookdown:_2016} and
\texttt{rmarkdown} \autocite{xie_r_2018}, with code generating the
examples inline. The source files can be found at:
\href{https://github.com/nspyrison/confirmation/}{github.com/nspyrison/confirmation/}.

The source code for the \texttt{spinifex} package can be found at
\href{https://github.com/nspyrison/spinifex/}{github.com/nspyrison/spinifex/}.
To install the package in R, run:

\begin{Shaded}
\begin{Highlighting}[]
\CommentTok{# install.package("devtools")}
\NormalTok{devtools}\OperatorTok{::}\KeywordTok{install_github}\NormalTok{(}\StringTok{"nspyrison/spinifex"}\NormalTok{)}
\end{Highlighting}
\end{Shaded}

\section{Discussion}\label{sec:discussion_paper}

This work has described an algorithm and package for exploring
conducting a manual tour, from a 2D projection, to explore the
sensitivity of structure to the contributions of a variable.

Future work on the algorithm and package would include developing it to
work with arbitrary projection dimension, enabling the method to operate
on other displays like parallel coordinates, and implementing the
unconstrained manual control, called oblique in
\textcite{cook_manual_1997}.

The Givens rotations and Householder reflections as outlined in
\textcite{buja_computational_2005} may provide a way to conduct higher
dimensional manual control. In a Givens rotation, the \(x\) and \(y\)
components (\(ie. \theta~= 0,~pi/2\)) of the in-plane rotation are
calculated separately and would be applied sequentially to produce the
radial rotation. Householder reflections define reflection axes to
project points on to the axes and generate rotations.

The \emph{tourr} package provides several \(d\)-dimensional graphic
displays including Andrews curves, Chernoff faces, parallel coordinate
plots, scatterplot matrix, and radial glyphs. Having manual controls
available for these types of displays would require a
dimensionally-generalized rotation matrix.

Development of a graphical user interface, e.g. \emph{shiny} app, would
make the \emph{spinifex} package more flexible. The user could easily
switch between variables to control, adjust the step size to make
smoother rotation sequences, or save any state to continue to continue
to explore the contributions of other variables.

\printbibliography[heading=bibintoc]



\end{document}
